docs: 3.1 release branch (#1058)
spectrocloud/librarium: content/docs/04-clusters/01-public-cloud/01-aws/08-create-cluster.md

---
title: "Create and Manage AWS IaaS Cluster"
metaTitle: "Create and Manage AWS Cluster"
metaDescription: "Learn how to add and manage a cluster deployed to AWS."
hideToC: false
fullWidth: false
category: ["how-to"]
---

import Tabs from 'shared/components/ui/Tabs';
import WarningBox from 'shared/components/WarningBox';
import InfoBox from 'shared/components/InfoBox';
import PointsOfInterest from 'shared/components/common/PointOfInterest';

# Create and Manage AWS IaaS Cluster

> Palette supports creating and managing Kubernetes clusters deployed to an AWS account. This section guides you on how to create a Kubernetes cluster in AWS that is managed by Palette.

Reviewer: `Palette supports creating and managing Kubernetes clusters deployed to an AWS account. This section guides you on how to create a Kubernetes cluster in AWS that Palette manages.`

# Prerequisites

The following prerequisites must be met before deploying a cluster to AWS:

- Access to an AWS cloud account 
- Palette integration with AWS account. Review the [Add AWS Account](/clusters/public-cloud/aws/create-gov-accounts) for guidance.

> - An infrastructure cluster profile. Review the [Create Cluster Profiles](/cluster-profiles/task-define-profile) for guidance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- You create an infrastructure cluster profile. Review the [Create Cluster Profiles](/cluster-profiles/task-define-profile) for guidance.
```

> - An infrastructure cluster profile. Review the [Create Cluster Profiles](/cluster-profiles/task-define-profile) for guidance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- You create an infrastructure cluster profile. Review the [Create Cluster Profiles](/cluster-profiles/task-define-profile) for guidance.
```

> - An [EC2 Key Pair](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/ec2-key-pairs.html) in the target region.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- There is an [EC2 Key Pair](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/ec2-key-pairs.html) in the target region.
```

> - Palette creates compute, network, and storage resources in AWS during the provisioning of Kubernetes clusters. Ensure there is sufficient capacity in the preferred AWS region for the creation of the following resources:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Palette creates compute, network, and storage resources in AWS during Kubernetes cluster provisioning. Ensure there is sufficient capacity in the AWS region to create these resources:
```

    - vCPU
    - VPC
    - Elastic IP
    - Internet Gateway
    - Elastic Load Balancers
    - NAT Gateway

<InfoBox>

> The following tags should be added to the virtual private network (VPC) public subnets to enable automatic subnet discovery for integration with AWS load balancer service. Replace the value `yourClusterName` with your cluster's name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable automatic subnet discovery for integration with AWS load balancer service, you should add the following tags to the virtual private network (VPC) public subnets. Replace the value `yourClusterName` with your cluster's name.
```

<br />

- `kubernetes.io/role/elb = 1`
- `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-provider-aws/role = public`
- `kubernetes.io/cluster/[yourClusterName] = shared` 
- `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-provider-aws/cluster/[yourClusterName] = owned`

</InfoBox>

# Deploying an AWS Cluster

<!-- `video: title: "aws-cluster-creation": ./cluster-creation-videos/aws.mp4` -->

Use the following steps to provision a new AWS cluster:

1. Ensure you are in the correct project scope.

> 2. Navigate to the left **Main Menu** and click on **Clusters**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. From the **Main Menu**,  click on **Clusters**
```

3. Click on **Add New Cluster**

4. You will receive a prompt asking you if you want to deploy a new cluster or import an existing cluster. Click on **Deploy New Cluster**

5. Select **AWS** and click on **Start AWS Configuration**

> 6. Populate the wizard page with the following information: name, description, tags and AWS account. Tags on a cluster are propagated to the VMs deployed on the cloud/data center environments. Click on **Next** after you have filled out all the required information.

Reviewer: `Populate the wizard page with the following information: name, description, tags, and AWS account. Tags on a cluster are propagated to the VMs deployed on the cloud/data center environments. Click on **Next** after completing all the required information.`

    |**Static Placement** | By default, Palette uses dynamic placement, wherein a new VPC with a public and private subnet is created to place cluster resources for every cluster. <br /> These resources are fully managed by Palette and deleted, when the corresponding cluster is deleted. Turn on the **Static Placement** option if it's desired to place resources into preexisting VPCs and subnets.<br /> If the user is making the selection of **Static Placement** of resources, the following placement information needs to be provided:
    ||**Virtual Network**: Select the virtual network from dropdown menu.
    ||**Control plane Subnet**: Select the control plane network from the dropdown menu.
    ||**Worker Network**: Select the worker network from the dropdown menu. |
    

10. Make the choice of updating the worker pool in parallel, if required. Click on **Next**.

11. Configure the master and worker node pools. A master and a worker node pool are configured by default. This is the section where you can specify the availability zones (AZ), instance types, [instance cost type](/clusters/public-cloud/aws/architecture#spotinstances), disk size, and the number of nodes.

<InfoBox>

> You can add new worker pools if you need to customize certain worker nodes to run specialized workloads. As an example, the default worker pool may be configured with the m3.large instance types for general-purpose workloads, and another worker pool with instance type g2.2xlarge can be configured to run GPU workloads.

Reviewer: For example, the default worker pool may be configured with the m3.large instance types for general-purpose workloads, and another worker pool with instance type g2.2xlarge can be configured to run GPU workloads.

i guess this is in passive voice.

  
    #### Effect Table
    
    |**Parameter**| **Description**|
    |-------------|---------------|
    | **NoSchedule**|  A pod that cannot tolerate the node taint and should not be scheduled to the node. 
    | **PreferNoSchedule**| The system will avoid placing a non-tolerant pod to the tainted node but is not guaranteed.
    | **NoExecute**|  New pods will not be scheduled on the node, and existing pods on the node if any on the node will be evicted they do not tolerate the taint. |

14. Click on **Next**.  
    
15. The settings page is where you can configure patching schedule, security scans, backup settings, setup role based access control (RBAC), and enable [Palette Virtual Clusters](/devx/palette-virtual-clusters). Review the settings and make changes if needed. Click on **Validate**.

16. Review the settings summary and click on **Finish Configuration** to deploy the cluster. Be aware that provisioning IaaS clusters can take several minutes.

The cluster details page of the cluster contains the status and details of the deployment. Use this page to track the deployment progress.

# Validate

> You can validate your cluster is up and running by reviewing the cluster details page. Navigate to the left **Main Menu** and click on **Clusters**. The **Clusters** page contains a list of all available clusters managed by Palette. Click on the row for the cluster you wish to review its details page. Ensure the **Cluster Status** field contains the value **Running**.

Reviewer: `Reviewing the cluster details page, you can validate that your cluster is up and running. Navigate to the left **Main Menu** and click on **Clusters**. The **Clusters** page contains a list of all available clusters managed by Palette. Click on the row for the cluster you wish to review its details page. Ensure the **Cluster Status** field contains the value **Running**.
		`

# Deleting an AWS IaaS Cluster

The deletion of an AWS cluster results in the removal of all instances and associated resources created for the cluster. To perform a cluster deletion, use the following steps. 

1. Ensure you are in the correct project scope.

2. Navigate to the left **Main Menu** and click on **Clusters**

3. Click on the cluster that you want to remove.

4. Click on the **Settings** drop-down menu.

5. Click on **Delete Cluster**

6. Type in the name of the cluster and click on **OK**

The cluster status is updated to **Deleting** while cluster resources are being deleted. Once all resources are successfully deleted, the cluster status is updated to **Deleted** and is removed from the list of clusters.

## Force Delete a Cluster

> If a cluster is stuck in the **Deletion** state for a minimum of 15 minutes it becomes eligible for force deletion. You can force delete a cluster from the tenant and project admin scope.

Reviewer: `If a cluster is stuck in the **Deletion** state for a minimum of 15 minutes, it becomes eligible for force deletion. You can force delete a cluster from the tenant and project admin scope.`

> To force delete a cluster follow the same steps outlined in [Deleting an AWS IaaS Cluster](#deleting-an-aws-iaas-cluster). However, after 15 minutes, a **Force Delete Cluster** option is available in the **Settings** drop-down menu. The **Settings** drop-down menu will provide you with an estimated time left before the force deletion becomes available..

Reviewer: `To force delete a cluster, follow the steps outlined in [Deleting an AWS IaaS Cluster](#deleting-an-aws-iaas-cluster). However, after 15 minutes, a **Force Delete Cluster** option is available in the **Settings** drop-down menu. The **Settings** drop-down menu will also provide an estimated time left before the force deletion becomes available.`
